Colorspace Management and Distribution (#4195)
ynput/OpenPype: website/docs/dev_colorspace.md

---
id: dev_colorspace
title: Colorspace Management and Distribution
sidebar_label: Colorspace
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

## Introduction
Defines the distribution of colors and OCIO config during publishing. Once colorspace data are captured and integrated into representation loaders could use them for loading image and video data with correct colorspace.

> :::warning Color Management (ImageIO)
> Settings schema is requred for any host or module which is processing pixel data.
> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::warning Color Management (ImageIO)
Adding the `imagio` settings schema is required for any host or module which is processing pixel data.
:::
```

## Data model

> The *colorspaceData* are stored at root of representation dictionary during publishing. Once they are integrated into representation db document they are stored as *representation_doc.data["colorspaceData"]*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Published representations that are extracted with color managed data store a **colorspaceData** entry in its data: `representation_doc["data"]["colorspaceData"]`.

It's up to the Host implementation to pre-configure the application or workfile to have the correct OCIO config applied.
It's up to the Extractors to set these values for the representation during publishing.
It's up tot he Loaders to read these values and apply the correct expected color space.
```

Reviewer 2: Typo `It's up tot he Loaders ` -> `It's up to the Loaders `

Reviewer: Fixed the typo in the suggestion. Thanks.

### Keys
- **colorspace** - string value used in other publish plugins and loaders

> - **configData** - storing two versions of path.

Reviewer 3: Yeah, I agree. Not sure `Data` is needed, but also why are we storing two paths?
`configData` could just be a string/path which always needs formatting to ensure its absolute.

> - **configData** - storing two versions of path.

Author: No issue with renaming `configData` to `config` key. But my recommendation is to keep absolute path in the config for future reference in case something goes wrong. The same way as we store path in representations db document.

> - **configData** - storing two versions of path.

Reviewer 3: Sounds good. Anything wrong with naming the entries `absolute` and `relative`?

> - **configData** - storing two versions of path.

Reviewer: One technically isn't relative but a template. And the absolute path might not be a valid absolute on your current machine if you're in a remote location or another OS. 

The `template` I think is nice. The `path` or `absolute` entries I'm not sure about. I would avoid giving to explicit of a meaning to it.

  - **path** - is formated and with baked platform root. It is used for posible need to find out where we were sourcing color config during publishing.
  - **template** - unformated tempate resolved from settings. It is used for other plugins targeted to remote publish which could be processed at different platform.

### Example
    {
        "colorspace": "linear",
        "configData": {
            "path": "/abs/path/to/config.ocio",
            "template": "{project[root]}/path/to/config.ocio"
        }
    }

## How to integrate it into a host

> 1. Each host setting schema should have following shemas. Ideally at top of all categories so it mimic already defined order at other hosts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The settings for a host should add the `imagio` schema. Ideally near the top of all categories in its `/settings/entities/schemas/system_scheams/host_settings/schema_{host}.json` so it matches the settings layout other hosts.
```

```json
{
    "key": "imageio",
    "type": "dict",
    "label": "Color Management (ImageIO)",
    "is_group": true,
    "children": [
        {
            "type": "schema",
            "name": "schema_imageio_config"
        },
        {
            "type": "schema",
            "name": "schema_imageio_file_rules"
        }

    ]
}
```

> 2. Use any mechanism to set OCIO config to host app resolved from `openpype\pipeline\colorspace.py:get_imageio_config`
> 	-	either set OCIO environment during host launching via pre-launch hook
> 	- or to set workfile ocio config path if host api is available

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Set the OCIO config path for the host to the path returned from `openpype.pipeline.colorspace.get_imageio_config`, for example:
	- set the `OCIO` environment variable before launching the host via a prelaunch hook
	- or (if the host allows) to set the workfile OCIO config path using the host's API
```

> 3. Each pixle related exporter plugins has to use parent class `openpype\pipeline\publish\publish_plugins.py:ExtractorColormanaged` and use it similarly as it is already implemented here `openpype\hosts\nuke\plugins\publish\extract_render_local.py`
> - **get_colorspace_settings**: is solving all settings for the host context
> - **set_representation_colorspace**: is adding colorspaceData to representation. If the colorspace is known then it is added directly to the representation with resolved config path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Each Extractor exporting pixel data (e.g. image or video) has to use parent class `openpype.pipeline.publish.publish_plugins.ExtractorColormanaged` and use `self.set_representation_colorspace` on the representations to be integrated.

The **set_representation_colorspace** method adds `colorspaceData` to the representation. If the `colorspace` passed is not `None` then it is added directly to the representation with resolved config path otherwise a color space is assumed using the configured file rules. If no file rule matches the `colorspaceData` is **not** added to the representation.

An example implementation can be found here: `openpype\hosts\nuke\plugins\publish\extract_render_local.py`

```

> 4. Implement the loading procedure. Each loader which needs to have colorspace (detected from representation doc) set to DCC reader nodes should implement following code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. The Loader plug-ins should take into account the `colorspaceData` in the published representation's data to allow the DCC to read in the expected color space.
```
